Making algorithms is fun,
but if you want them to actually be used in a clinical setting,
you need to know who uses them,
who regulates them, and how they do it.
This learning objective will introduce you to how to
take your algorithms from bench to bedside.
Every month, there are hundreds,
if not thousands of new academic publications for AI in 2D medical imaging.
Algorithms are constantly being improved upon,
and new open source datasets are being released for training.
Why then is the field of clinical radiology not completely overrun with AI applications?
In this section, we'll learn about the regulatory landscape,
and the challenges in bringing an algorithm to a market.
In other words, from bench to bedside.
Stakeholders for AI algorithms in 2D medical imaging fall into
three main categories: clinical, industry, and regulatory.
We've covered the main clinical stakeholders so far in this lesson: radiologists,
diagnosing clinicians, and patients.
But we'll talk a little bit more about how they're involved.
Now radiologists are likely going to be the end user of an AI application for 2D imaging.
Radiologists really care about disruption to their workflow.
What this means is that no matter how good your algorithm is,
if it creates more work for the radiologist such as needing
to load in a separate type of software or viewing system for each image,
they will never use it and it will not get adopted clinically.
Radiologists also play an important advisory role in the algorithm development process.
They will be one of your main resources when
you figure out how your algorithm might fit into
a clinical setting as they will be the ones who can describe
the real pain points in the medical imaging system as they currently stands.
They can also give you lots of advice about what is typically seen
in the real world that will help you approach your algorithm design.
Clinicians, on the other hand,
have less visibility into the inner workings of an algorithm.
They do, however, also care about low disruption to their workflows.
While for a radiologist,
disruption may be having to introduce a new type of software,
disruption to a clinician is more along the lines of having to wait longer for results.
If your algorithm is really accurate but takes
twice as long as a radiologist to generate a report,
it won't fly with the clinician.
Clinicians are also very concerned about the interpretability of your algorithm output.
Your algorithm should not be outputting
some new crazy metric that a clinician is not familiar with.
While it's good to introduce new types of metrics to make medicine better,
you want to make sure that whatever your algorithm reports,
it's something that makes sense to a clinician and doesn't leave them with
a greater cognitive load to interpret
than what they're used to from a radiologist's report.
Finally, another important clinical stake holder to always keep in mind is the patient.
At the end of the day,
the patient may be your most important stakeholder,
and the FDA looks at your algorithm through the lens of
protecting the patient from all unnecessary risks.
Patients may never know that AI was involved in understanding their medical images,
but they really do care,
just like radiologists and clinicians,
about timeliness and receiving accurate test results.